This analysis investigates the relationship between chronic school absenteeism in New York City public schools and class size and pupil-teacher ratio. Chronic absenteeism, a critical indicator of school quality and student success, remains a significant challenge, with 41% of NYC public school students chronically absent in the 2022-2023 school year.

One of the most important recent policy measures that the NYC Department of Education (DOE) undertook to respond to this and other education quality concerns, is to decrease class sizes by a local law that requires schools in New York City to reduce their class sizes over the course of five years. The law was signed by the New York State governor in 2022.

The analysis reveals an unexpected negative relationship between chronic absenteeism and both class size and pupil-teacher ratio. In other words, contrary to expectations, chronic absenteeism tends to increase as class sizes and pupil-teacher ratio decrease. The effect of class size on absenteeism is relatively small, with a 0.29 decrease in absenteeism for each one-unit increase in class size. However, the relationship with pupil-teacher ratio is stronger: the model predicts nearly 2 fewer chronically absent students for each unit increase in pupil-teacher ratio (i.e., more students per teacher).

While these results are statistically significant, they explain only 17.8% of the variation in absenteeism. This suggests that other important factors—such as teacher quality, student engagement, classroom resources and factors external to the school (health and family situation) are likely influencing absenteeism rates, and these factors are not captured in the current model.

Although the study indicates that reducing class sizes may not be the most effective policy to reduce absenteeism, the findings underscore the complexity of addressing chronic absenteeism. Further research is needed to explore the role of additional variables and to evaluate the broader impact of educational policies like class size reduction.

For more insights, this [visual exploratory analysis on chronic absenteeism in NYC public schools](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/lyuba3471/viz/ChronicSchoolAbsenteeisminNYCPublicSchools/ChronicSchoolAbsenteeisminNYCPublicSchools) provides additional context and detail.
